---
layout: post
title: "Written Task 1: The Chosen"
author: "Carlo Jacobs"
---

## Short story: The Chosen

_40 years later._

As soon as the student raised his pitch a little at the end of his sentence, thus formulating it as a question, I was at a loss for words. It was a type of question that resonated perfectly with my own way of thinking. A type of question that intrigued me, and exactly the type of question that I myself would have asked years ago. The cleverly formulated query was not something that I was used to getting from my students. Especially not my students at NYU. The people in the lecture hall were completely silent while their professor was contemplating an answer in his mind, a process which usually only took a few seconds. But this time it was different. The long pause that followed was simultaneously calming and building the suspension in the room. Then I said something which I did not say very often: “I wouldn’t know, to be frank…”. The class was dead silent, which made the bell seem even louder. I sat down behind the small desk in front of the blackboard and watched the room bleed out until I was the only one left. As I sat there thinking about what had just occurred, my eyes went from one corner of the room to the other, trying to pick up on anything that I had missed.
I couldn’t possibly remember the name of the student. Which was odd, considering the fact that my memory, even though it wasn’t as good as it used to be, never lets me forget any names. I shifted my weight on the chair and leaned backward whilst reassuring myself that it must have been someone that I had never met before. Still, he looked so familiar.

The spokes of my bike wheel had a little bent in them, giving the wheel a slight perturbation. It caused a sort of swaying rhythm when the bike was in motion. As I cycled to my apartment I kept track of the of time between each sway of the wheel and calculated how fast I was going. I smiled as I thought back of those private math lessons with my good friend professor Salquist. Thanks to him, my mathematical skills had improved substantially this year. I even let out a laugh when I remembered how he always got extremely frustrated with my lessons in behavioral psychology. “But how can you be certain?”, he would always ask. A question that could easily be answered if it were directed at the derivation of the Hermite polynomials or the Fourier transform. Much harder to answer, unfortunately, when directed at the material that we covered in our mini-lectures about psychology. Professor Salquist’ questions reminded me of the questions Reuven used to ask me when I was teaching him about my field of study. Questions that, although simple, always made me doubt my own knowledge of the subject. Reuven frequently asked me questions like that. Questions like those of professor Salquist. Questions like the one that I had just been asked mere moments ago.
While I cycled past the trees in Central Park, the wind blew the kippah of my head. I felt like my world had been turned upside down, the mysterious boy from that afternoon refused to leave my thoughts alone. They were so similar, even his voice was nearly identical to that of my old friend, whom I hadn’t seen in… 40 years, was it?. I always liked that voice, it was calming. I was confused, the boy seemed a lot younger than Reuven would have been by now. Even if it was him, why wouldn’t he simply have greeted me? Why would he just sit there, with a hat on his head, all the way in the back? It was a mystery to me.

The following days were quiet. I gave lectures, graded assignments and did some research of my own. I went through the days with the memories of Reuven in the back of my mind. It had been a long time since I had last recalled those memories, they had almost slipped away from me like they did not matter to me anymore, a thought that made me feel uncomfortable and a little ashamed. As I entered the building where my next lecture was planned to take place, I realized that a week had passed since the boy had first appeared in my lecture and, even though he did so in a very passive manner, entered my thoughts. My feet walked the stairs while my mind wondered if he would be there again today. I walked into the room and noticed him sitting in exactly the same spot as last week. I proceeded to give my lecture though I wasn’t mentally present during the entire 90 minutes of explaining Piaget's theory of cognitive development to the class. At the end of my talk, the students stood up and walked away. But the boy stayed in his seat. I stood next to my desk, words reluctant to come out of my mouth. We looked at each other. Then, the boy stood up and walked down the steps. As he moved closer I recognized his father’s posture, his way of walking. He stopped right in front of me and smiled for a brief moment before shifting his messenger bag to the front of his torso and inserting his hand in the front pocket. He pulled out a ball and placed it gently on my desk. I took the ball in my hands. It was a baseball, a blood-stained baseball. The ball captured my gaze and took me back to 40 years ago. To that beautiful game. To the incident that took place that day and the hospital visit that sparked our friendship. I heard the sound of a door closing behind me. I looked up, but the boy was gone.

## Rationale

For written task 1, I chose to write a short follow-up story to “The Chosen” by Chaim Potok. It relates to the analysis of The Chosen and the analysis of written language in class. The story takes place 40 years after the ending of the original book. It takes us to New York University where Daniel Saunders has become a successful and renowned professor of psychology. He meets a person that strongly reminds him of his old friend Reuven. This person has a gift for him that takes him back to the beginning of his life.

With this written task, my aim was to sketch an image of Danny, 40 years older. I tried to show the reader how he has grown and developed. I did so by explaining what was going on inside Danny’s head and alluding to personal stories and memories of the past. I deliberately chose a mysterious element in the text, the appearance of this unknown character that resembles Reuven, because it engages the reader and lets them contemplate their own ideas. My intention was to make the reader eager to find out who this mystery person is and reveal them only at the very end of the story. The ending also leaves the reader with a lot of unanswered questions. The style of writing of this short story is similar to that of the original book and so is the audience. The purpose of this short story is to entertain.